.TH TEX2MAIL 1 "3 Mars 2001"
.SH NAME
tex2mail \- TeX to ascii math prettyprinter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR tex2mail
[-linelength=
.IR length ]
[-maxdef=
.IR number ]
[-debug=
.IR number ]
[-by_par=
.IR number ]
[-TeX] 
[-ragged]
[-noindent]

.SH DESCRIPTION

Filter converting TeX or LaTeX math formulae to ASCII art. tex2mail is
used by the PARI-GP calculator for output method
.I external prettyprint .
Under gp, prettyprint mode can be set by
.B default(output, 3)
(or \\o3). By default, this switches gp main output to TeX format, filtered
by 

.RS
tex2mail \-TeX \-noindent \-ragged \-by_par
.RE

Flags passed to tex2mail can be modified via the 
.IR prettyprinter 
default in gp.

.SH OPTIONS
The following command line options are available:
.TP
.BI \-linelength=length
Wrap text at this column.
.TP
.BI \-maxdef=number
definition loops: croak if more than maxdef substitutions in a given
paragraph.
.TP
.BI \-debug=debuglevel
output debugging messages.
.TP
.BI \-by_par
Expect each paragraph to be terminated by *exactly* 2 "\\n", and do not
print an extra "\\n" between paragraphs.
.TP
.BI \-TeX
Assume input formulae are in plain TeX format.
.TP
.BI \-ragged
leave right ragged.
.TP
.BI \-noindent
assume \\noindent everywhere.
.SH BUGS

 % at the end of a line followed by \\n\\n is recognized as end of paragraph
.SH AUTHOR
Ilya Zakharevitch 

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR gp (1),
.IR tex (1),

.SH COPYING

This program is  free  software;  you  can  redistribute  it and/or  modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A  PARTICULAR  PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
more details.

You should have received a copy of the  GNU  General  Public License  along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,  Inc.,
675  Mass  Ave,  Cambridge,  MA 02139, USA.
